---
title: A month of meditation
slug: a-month-of-meditation
published: true
date: 2021-04-10
---

I started meditating regularly just about a month ago and it's been pretty great.

Meditation for me was always something that was hard to do consistently. It's something I originally reached for when I was starting to get panic attacks.

About two months into my junior fall semester, I started experiencing random, debilitating panic attacks about once a week. After a few weeks, that number jumped to a few times a week, and then to almost every day. Almost every day, I'd have a panic attack that came out of nowhere that would completely derail my day, keeping me from getting anything done. I would avoid certain places that I thought would trigger them, and avoiding certain people. It was making it really, really hard for me to live a free, fully-functional life.

I had bought a Headspace subscription a year or two before I experienced my first panic attack, and I guess it had renewed ever since. Desperate for literally any help I could find, I started the Headspace anxiety course. It was incredibly helpful. It took only a few lessons to kickstart a re-evaluation of my relationship with anxiety and my panic attacks. Instead of being attached to my panic attacks, I was now able to live with them, acknowledge them as part of my existence, and just be present. Learning to meditate and pay attention to what was going on around me without assigning judgements to anything, without contributing further to the panic or anxiety I was feeling, was an incredibly helpful tool that got me through the rest of my junior year. It didn't stop the panic attacks, but it made them a ton easier to deal with.

After I finished off my junior fall semester, I changed a few things that reduced the number of panic attacks I had: I reduced the amount of stress in my life, decided to take a semester off from school, and started working with my psychiatrist on starting medication to help with the panic attacks and anxiety. Things were starting to get better. I slowly forgot about a consistent meditation and mindfulness practice. While I wasn't meditating consistently, I still used the tool of observing without judgement to disconnect the 'loop' of anxiety.

Things continued getting better for me. Medication gave me a lowered amount of anxiety that I hadn't experienced in years. It felt like an enormous weight was lifted off my shoulders. I started my new job (as a software engineer for The Nine), I spent more time with friends, and I had more free time to focus on doing the things I loved. It felt like I was finally able to tread water on my own, like the ruthless cycle of anxiety and ADHD were finally something I was able to live with more.

As life started to gain more consistency for me, I decided to start building some habits (like a morning routine) that I could rely on when things inevitably got worse. I knew that I'd be back in school this Fall, and I wanted to prepare for that as much as I could. I slowly started crafting a simple morning routine (drinking a glass of water after getting out of bed and making breakfast), and one of the first items I added onto it was meditation. I really wanted to deepen my practice, to do it consistently, as I heard all of the real benefits of it start to come when you're able to practice every day.

So I re-downloaded Headspace and gave that a try for a week or two, but it really felt like something was missing. Headspace was great and all, but I struggled to pay attention during sessions. It felt kinda boring, and it felt like Andy was just teaching me to use meditation as a tool to calm down. Having been through the anxiety course, I knew it could be so much more, so I looked for alternatives. In the end, I settled on Sam Harris' Waking Up course/app, and I'm so glad I did.

At first I was a little apprehensive of taking a meditation course from a psychiatrist who didn't really... give off a mindfulness vibe y'know? I think Sam planned for this though, cause the beginning of the course was very accessible and gave me time to trust him as a teacher. Things started off simply, with Sam going back over the basics of meditation (focusing on the breath, listening to sounds, being present, etc). All the stuff that I had done in Headspace and in therapy before was being taught to me again, slightly-differently, but there was nothing really new or exciting.

But eventually, things started to get different. Sam started to really push me, to challenge me, to look at meditation differently than how I was used to. Instead of meditating to reduce anxiety or to be calm, Sam started to veer me more in the direction of using meditation to live a more examined life. He asked deep questions about consciousness that I hadn't really considered before (is consciousness 3-dimensional? where are thoughts in that space? is there a thinker?). The app encouraged me to not just meditate for 15 minutes, but to be more mindful in everyday life. The app would send me little audio clips once a day of Sam reminding me to be more mindful, or of a simple thought that would veer me back to the present.

Meditation shifted from being "a time to sit still for 15 minutes before I rush back into the chaos of everyday life" to being "a time to explore the present and observe myself". Meditation was no longer a time of forced attention on a specific part of the body or of trying to gain a clear mind. Instead, it became a space for me to be curious about different parts of how I experience the present, to look into different facets of consciousness and explore how I experience the world through my senses. The simple act of paying attention to the physical senses and the state of the mind transformed into exploring deeper parts of consciousness (how do you know you sit behind your eyes? have you ever stopped for a minute to just _feel your face_?).

While I didn't develop any answers from this (and I don't think I ever will), I really appreciated how Sam Harris presented meditation and how he opened me up to a world of possibilties. **Meditation doesn't have to be boring**. It can be as broad or expansive as you want it to be. And it's really quite beautiful: meditation at its core is just taking time out of your day to be an observer, to sit still and to just watch. But as you do that more and more, you gain more and more freedom to explore this beautiful practice, to learn about and deepen your practice. And while the benefits aren't world-shifting or life-changing, the practice itself is incredibly rewarding and very **fun**.
