---
title: Progressive Christianity vs Conservative Christianity
slug: progressive-christianity-vs-consvervative-christianity
published: true
date: 2021-04-02
---

I’ve been doing some fun research about Progressive Christianity over the past few days, and that’s been pretty fun. I’m not religious, and I’ll likely never be religious again, but it’s been fun to learn about a better part of the religion that hurt me a lot as a child. I started watching God is Grey on YouTube, who’s a progressive, sex-positive, LGBTQ+ affirming, pro-choice Christian and I LOVE HER. She’s super down to earth, very nice, and very easy to watch as someone that’s not religious. Plus I just love that she’s basically a humanist but Christian y’know?

Anyway, I started watching that and learning more about how progressive Christians think and that’s been really quite fun. Progressive Christians basically look inward towards the religion and try to see what’s wrong with the religion, and try to fix it. They acknowledge that the Bible isn’t the literal word of god, that it’s more a collection of books written by mortals, and use that to examine it and figure out their morals a little more closely. For instance, Jesus said nothing about being gay (Paul did, and it was very mistranslated), so they use that and interpolate (based on their definition of God) to determine what and how God thinks of gay people. Modern marriage is another good example: in the Bible, it was a property transaction. Modern-day marriage didn’t exist at all in the Bible. So they use different scriptures and different qualities of their god to interpolate what their god would think about different things.

Progressive Christianity ultimately arrives at this point where it’s a combination of secular humanism and some of the better parts of Christianity. The parts about loving everyone, hanging out with everyone, and viewing all sin as equal are things that they stick to, and they seem extremely hell-bent on examining the practices and behaviors of the church and analyzing whether they’re actually ‘producing the right fruit’. They view any bad practices (eg. the anti-LGBTQ+ practices of conservative churches of the past several years) as failings due to a misinterpretation or mistranslation of the Bible, or because the human beings that wrote the Bible were... fallible, like all humans are. They examine and reflect on the impact the church has on the outside world, and they use that to course-correct as often as possible. If something causes harm, then it’s probably worth re-examining if it’s ‘god’s will’ or not.

Progressive Christians also don’t attend a lot of churches, and they seem extremely open to talking to a lot of other people. They’re not afraid of criticizing ‘fundamentalist’ or conservative Christians, and they’re very open about the harm that ‘purity culture’ and current practices of conservative churches create. The ‘purity culture’ thing is especially not fun for me, and was very eye-opening.

In the Church of Christ, we basically shamed young women for how they dressed, making them view themselves as responsible for the sins of men. We had this very black-and-white way of looking at women and men and gender roles: men were horny, sex-obsessed, and uncontrollable, and women wanted relationships, emotions, and gentleness. The more I’ve gotten into looking at all of this stuff, the more and more I’ve realized just how harmful and bad it all is. Women end up viewing their bodies as owned by other men (something that’s deeply misogynistic), which in the end makes them feel shame for being raped or sexually assaulted (when it’s obviously not their fault).

This is something I always felt weirdly off-put by while in the church: it made no sense to me that women should be forced to dress one way when we didn’t worry about men being ‘too revealing’, or something similar. This cognitive dissonance I experienced is another thing that differentiates progressive Christians from conservative ones: progressive Christians celebrate and support it, while conservative Christians shut things down that are against the ‘groupthink’. This supporting of ‘finding your own path’, of critical thinking, is something that I think is a double-edged sword for progressive Christians: it’s something that’s very welcoming and refreshing, but it’s also something that might make people leave progressive Christianity. Once you get too into critical thought, it’s almost inevitable that you’ll be an atheist or at least agnostic.

Progressive Christians seem to suffer the same fatal flaw that conservative Christians suffer from: they’re afraid of not having answers. Being an atheist, I’m extremely comfortable with not having concrete, ‘correct’ answers to things. What caused the beginning of the universe? Where did we come from? How does consciousness work? I don’t know, and I think that’s beautiful. Whereas progressive Christians, just like conservative Christians, just simply do not understand not having answers. For them, not having answers to big questions like that is a failure of an ideology, a limit that can’t be superseded. They need something with answers right now, regardless of how correct or well-supported those answers are.

So in conclusion, progressive Christianity seems very cool, but I’m sure it’s not something I’ll return to really ever. I’m very comfortable in my secularity: I don’t think it’s going anywhere. At the same time, I can acknowledge and study the beauty and good parts of other religions, and appreciate them for what they are: another way to view the world that, although incorrect, has things we can learn from it.
